Yes, Ravana literally had ten heads. This except from the Uttara Kanda of the Ramayana describes Ravana's birth:

[T]he girl [Kaikeshi]... after a length of time brought forth a very terrible and hideous offspring having the form of a Rakshasa, — having ten necks, furnished with large teeth, and resembling a heap of collyrium, with coppery lips, twenty arms, huge faces, and flaming hair. On his having been born, jackals with flaming mouths and other ferocious beasts began to gyrate on the left. And that god showered down blood; and the clouds uttered forth harsh sounds. And the Sun was deprived of his splendour; and meteors began to dart to the earth. And the earth shook; and the wind swept away violently. And that lord of streams — the ocean, which was calm before, became agitated. And his sire resembling his grand-father named him, (saying), "As this one hath been born with ten necks, he shall be called Ten-necked."

Now as described in another excerpt from the Uttara Kanda, Ravana cut off nine of his heads in the course of his Tapasya (deep metitation), but then Brahma restored them:

And the Ten-necked one passed ten thousand years without fare. On a thousand years being complete, he offered his own head as a sacrifice to Fire. In this way he passed away nine thousand years ; and nine of his heads entered into Fire. And as in the tenth year he intended to strike off his tenth head, [Brahma] the Great-father presented himself at that place.... [Brahma said] "Hear! I having been gratified, will confer on thee a fresh boon. O Rakshasa, O sinless one, those heads of thine which have been offered as sacrifices and which have sunk into the fire, shall again be thine.

Ravana's heads also play a role in the final battle between God Shri Rama and Ravana, because as God Shri Rama kept cutting Ravana's heads off they kept magically regrowing, as descibed in the Yuddha Kanda of the Ramayana:

Thereupon, the great-armed Rama who augmented the fame of the kings born in Raghu dynasty, stretching with anger, the serpent-like arrow with his bow, chopped off the glorious head of Ravana, which was graced with blazing ear-rings. Then, all the three worlds saw that head, fallen on the ground. Another head, exactly similar to that head, cropped up on the shoulders of Ravana. That second head was again chopped off by Rama, possessing a swift hand and who was swift in his act. The second head of Ravana was cut off by arrows in that battle. Soon after that head was chopped off, it again rose into view. Rama chopped off that head too with his arrows looking like thunderbolts. In the same manner, a hundred of Ravana's heads of equal splendour were chopped off by Rama. Yet, no certainty about Ravana's death could be seen.

It was only when God Shri Rama hit Ravana’s heart with a Brahmastra that Ravana finally died.

Ravana performed an intense penance - tapasya - to Brahma, lasting 10,000 years. During his penance, Ravana chopped off his head 10 times as a sacrifice to appease Brahma. Each time he sliced his head off, a new head arose, thus enabling him to continue his penance.

At last, Brahma, pleased with his austerity, appeared after Ravana's 10th decapitation and offered him a boon. Ravana asked for immortality, which Brahma refused of course, but gave him the celestial nectar of immortality, which we all know was stored under his navel.

Ravana, one of the most powerful beings ever to roam the earth, is also known as the supreme anti-hero in Ramayana. He was the king of rakshasas and is depicted with 10 heads and 20 arms, which lent him the name "Dasamukha".

RAA KSHA SAA in Devanagari script read in reverse becomes SAA KSHA RAA which means a learned person. But a learned person misusing the knowledge for wrong preasons invites destruction. Nuclear energy used for weapon making destroys. Nuclear isotopes are are used by doctors to cure cancers. Ravan was learned but misused his learning.

Ravana was one of the most powerful human/demon on the earth. Ravana was Brahmmin by caste.

(1) God Brahmma => (2) Saptarshi Pulatsya(Brahmmin) =>(3) Maharshi Vishrava(Brahmmin) => (4) Ravana

Ravana’s mother Kaikashi was Demon (Rakshashi). Her other names are Keshini & Nikasha.

(1) God Brahma => (2) Saptarshi Marichi => (3) Maharshi Kashyap => (4) Rakshasha Sukesha => (5) Rakshasha Sumali => (6) Kaikashi => (7) Ravana.

Sumali the Demon was the King of Lanka down South, but in a royal battle he lost all his riches, his kingdom and was staying in the Patala Loga. But he was scheming to come back to his riches and regain his kingdom, through another descendent of his. He was envious of Kubera, the Dhanathipathi of the Devas.

Sumali had a daughter Kaikasi. On the instruction of her father Sumali, she married the Sage Vishravas in a Ghandharva Vivaha ceremony and desired that she should beget a child immediately.

One of the customs in those days was that if an eligible female desired to marry an eligible male, the male could not refuse in spite of the fact that he had other wives. So Sage Vishravas married Kaikasi under compulsion and inspite of the fact that the time was evening and not auspicious to beget a child, he blessed her to have a male child.

When great rishis like Vishravas desire to have a child, they get their children with the power of their tapasyas. So Kaikasi delivered a male child, no sooner the sage chanted some mantras and sprinkled the holy waters from his kamandalam on Kaikasi.
But as predicted by the sage Vishravas the time was inauspicious and the child born was dark in color with ten necks and ten heads and twenty hands. It had fangs in place of teeth, protruding from its mouth. Since he was born to a Rakshashi and he was born in an inauspecious time, he was born with 10 heads. THIS IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF HIS 10 Heads.(How he got the name of Ravana is narrated here below )

As he was born to a great Rishi Vishravas, learnt all 4 vedas, and 6 upanishadas later. Kaikasi was disappointed and prayed to the rishi to do something and make the child look beautiful and normal. The sage with his yogic powers changed the color of the baby from dark to fair, and also changed the facial appearances. The baby looked beautiful, with ten heads, ten necks and twenty hands.
Since he had ten heads, he was named Dashagrievan and because of his ten necks he was also called Dashakandan

Once, Dasakantan encountered Lord Shiva at his abode in Kailash. And attempted to uproot and move the mountain on a whim.

Shiva, annoyed by Dasakantan’s arrogance, pressed his littlest toe on Kailash, pinning him firmly and painfully under it. His ganas informed Dasakantan of whom he had crossed, upon which Dasakantan became penitent.

Then Dasakantan sang songs praising Shiva, and is said to have done so for years until Shiva released him from his bondage.

Pleased with his resilience and devotion, Shiva gave to him the divine sword Chandrahas ("Moon-blade"). It was during this incident that Dasakantan acquires the name 'Ravana', meaning "(He) of the terrifying roar", given to him by Shiva when the earth is said to have quaked at Ravana’s cry of pain when the mountain was pinned on him.

Ravana’s 10 heads are symbol of:-

(1). he is willing to forgo everything as following:-

Kama (lust),
Krodha (anger),
Moha (delusion),
Lobha (Greed),
Mada (pride),
Maatsarya (Envy),
Manas (the mind),
Buddhi (intellect),
Chitta (Will) and
Ahamkara (the Ego) in order to attain the Atma-Linga
First six are called “Shadripu:” in Sanskrit. {Shadripu = Shad:(06) + Ripu (Enemies)}
Dussehera is a festival when effigies of the demon king is burnt. This is a metamorphic representation of cleaning your own mind, getting rid of the negative forms of love and maya that traps the mind.

Hence the day is called Vijaya Dashami – Vijaya (Win) + Dashami (10)

which means winning those 10 distortions of mind.

(2). Ravana’s ten head is a symbolic representation of the fact that:-

Ravana was scholar in 04 Veda & 06 Upanishada.
Ravana’s ten heads is a metamorphication of his knowledge of the six shastras and the four Vedas.

Namely:-

Shshtra

Sankhyashastra (Mathematics)
Yog Shastra (Yoga as a way of life, meditation)
Nyayashastra (Law and administration)
Vaisheshik Shastra (Physics, astronomy, mechanics)
Purvamimansa (Philosophy, Justification)
Uttar Mimansa Shastra
Veda

Rigveda
Yajurveda
Samveda
Atharvaveda.
His original name is “Dashagriva” (a monster with 10 heads).

Ravana was a master in astrology, it is said that he broke one of Saturn’s arms, when Sani deva refused to be in a perfect position which would have made Meghnad immortal.

While Ravana was dying, Lakhsmana ran towards him so that he can learn the knowledge of diplomacy, since nobody in this planet had better knowledge and experience of administrative diplomacy over Ravana. His 10 heads represented a mammoth pool of knowledge and experience as a ruler, king and as a Brahman.

Ravana's 10 heads symbolise the six Shastras and four Vedas, making him a great scholar and the most intelligent person of his time. But the question still remains unanswered...Why ten?

Indian mythology is very tricky. On one side you see the story, but on the other side, there is a deep, hidden meaning to every story. The 10 heads of Ravana signify the 10 forms of love - yes, love!

The ten loves are:

1. Loving your designation, your post or qualifications - ego or ahankara;

2. Loving your family & friends - attachment or moha;

3. Loving one's perfect self - which leads to regret or paschyataap;

4. Loving/expecting perfection in others - leading to anger or krodha;

5. Loving the past - leading to hatred or ghrina;

6. Loving the future - leading to fear or bhaya;

7. Loving/wanting to be no.1 - this is jealousy or irshya;

8. Loving things - which brings in greed or lobha;

9. Loving parts of the body of the opposite gender - which is lust or kama;

10. Loving fame, money, and children - brings inertia/insensitivity or jaddata;

In Short, the 10 heads signify the 10 negative forms of love.

Ahamkara – Ego
Moha – Attachment
Krodha – Anger
Ghrina – Hatred
Paschataap – regret
Irshya – jealousy
Lobha – Greed
Kama – Lust
Jaddata – Insensitivity
Bhaya – Fear
An important thing to notice here is that all the negative feelings are also forms of love. Actually, they are said to be "distorted forms of love". Indeed, every action, everything, every feeling is a form of love. Ravana too was said to be obsessed with these negative feelings, which led to his destruction.

Despite Ravana being a master of 64 types of knowledge, of what use was all the learning when he did not put them into practice? Though he had all the wealth, he could not enjoy anything because of his excessive desires. He became a slave to his feelings which finally led to his death.

Each and every religion teaches us that it is important to control our sens & focus single minded.

Ravana is the king of Rakshasas. He is said to have ten heads. He was not born with ten heads.

The 10 heads, symbolize the 6 Sastras, and 4 Vedas. He was a master of 64 types of knowledge. He built the city of Lanka in gold. In terms of learning, he was on par with Rama. But, what is the use of all his learning? He became a slave to his senses. As he could not control his desires, he not only ruined himself, but also his entire clan. The Lanka was completely reduced to ashes. Ultimately Ravana repented in the end, he said, " Though I was the master of all knowledge, I did not put them into practice. O people do not get spoilt like me. Though I had all the wealth, I could not enjoy anything because of excessive desires”

Another interpretations is that his 10 heads were:- Kama (lust), Krodha (anger), Moha (delusion), Lobha (Greed), Mada (pride), Maatsarya (Envy), Manas (the mind), Buddhi (intellect), Chitta (Will) and Ahamkara (the Ego) - these ten constituted his ten heads. The head controls our destiny, the 10 heads of Ravana controlled his actions and ultimately led to his destruction.